# The Butterfly Did It: The Aberrant Vote for Buchanan in Palm Beach County, Florida

## Summary
In "The Butterfly Did It: The Aberrant Vote for Buchanan in Palm Beach County, Florida" the authors (Wand, Shotts, Sekhon, Mebane, Herron, Brady) first establish that Reform Party candidate, Pat Buchanan's level of support at Palm Beach County (PBC) in the 2000 Presidential election was an anomaly and then argue why they believe the butterfly ballot caused the anomaly. Using county level data from the 1996 Presidential election, the authors created a overdispersed binomial regression model to estimate the expected number of votes for Buchanan in all US counties. The overdispersed binomial model helps account for the fact that people demographically alike tend to have similar voting patterns. The authors created a robust method to estimate the dispersion factor ($\sigma$) which is less susceptible to being influenced by outliers. (The authors believe this method could even be used in future analysis to model US Presidential election voting behavior.) The authors found that PBC had the largest studentized residual of any other county in the country. Unlike other counties with anomalies, PBC was not contiguous to other high Buchanan voting counties which would suggest a legitimate regional trend. Even in 1996, PBC was not an outlier in voting for the Reform party candidate. Having established the anomaly, the authors try to estimate how many of the Buchanan voters meant to vote for Gore. They compare Buchanan's proportion of support between PBC's absentee pool (which did not use the butterfly ballot) and PBC's election day pool (which did use the butterfly ballot) and find that election day voters were 4x more likely to vote for Buchanan. They also examine the correlation between election day voter who voted for Buchanan and those who voted for the Democratic senator Nelson and find that majority of the voters who voted for Buchanan aligned with the Democratic party. The authors also rule out malfunctioning precinct machines as the cause of the anomaly since similar anomalies were not found in PBC's congressional votes. Wand et al. believe that approximately 2K voters accidently voted for Buchanan instead of Al Gore which is a large enough margin to have cost Gore the Presidential election. 

## Discussion
I like that this paper was written for a general audience and that the statistical techniques were explained in laymen's terms within the paper and then in more detail in the appendix. Personally, I would have liked more of an emphasis on why the binomial overdispersed model is the best parametric or non-parametric method to model voting behavior and empirical accuracy from other sources. I had do quite a bit of independent research (aka googling) to convince myself it was a legitimate model. I’m also curious how well this model would model the 2016 Presidential election.

While no one piece of evidence is individually damming, all the analysis (studentized residuals based of 1996 model, the "natural experiment" with absentee ballots, correlation with Senator ballots, the affidavits from PBC claiming their vote was misrepresented) pointing to the same conclusion that the butterfly ballot caused many Democratic voters in PBC to vote for Buchanan instead of Gore is extremely convincing. For me, the weakest link the analysis is the use of absentee ballots to determine that approximately 2000 voters had meant to vote for Gore rather than Buchanan. I’m just not convinced that PBC absentee voters and PBC election day voters represent a natural experiment. I think voters in counties around PBC are probably more representative of PBC voters than absentee voters. I feel like a model built off the contiguous county data would probably be more accurate than the absentee model – but then again, the true parameter is unknowable. A revote might even be more inaccurate given that there is nothing stopping voters from changing their vote. (Knowing the election is now between Bush and Gore, it doesn’t make sense to vote for a third party candidate.) 


# 'Law and Data': The Butterfly Ballot Episode
## Summary
*Law and Data* recalls the aftermath of the 2000 Presidential election from the perspective of the statisticians that wrote *The Butterfly Did It*. The paper reads like a dramatized episode of *Law and Order*, recounting each day after the election and what each "character" was doing. At the end, the authors reflect on the outcome of the court decision and what they took away from it. Within 24 hours of the election, networks like CNN and other sources had posted county level voting data on the election. The very first analysis came from Adams & Fastnow at CMU which was a very basic OLS regression that showed PBC as a outlier. Mebane, Sekhon and Wand from Harvard decided they would try to refine this regression and try to answer 3 crucial questions:
* Was Buchanan's vote in Palm Beach County really an
outlier?
* Were the extra Buchanan votes from Gore supporters?
* Were the over votes cast by Gore supporters?
Meanwhile Henry Brady and some graduate students at UCB began using precinct level data to create a model that reporting what fraction of mistaken Buchanan votes were meant for Gore. After posting their analysis online, each statistician was contact by a lawyer representing PBC voters and asked to testify as expert witnesses. The "law and data" team was confident about their analysis and worked hard to represent their complex analysis in a way that would be accessible to people without statistical backgrounds. But at the end of the day "facts didn't matter". The courts followed conservative jurisprudence and since plaintiff could not prove that the butterfly ballot was actually illegal, a recount or revote was not conducted. The "law and order" team stated they understood the court's motivations but felt justice had not been served. 

## Discussion
This was a really interesting read. I was super impressed by how in a matter of 4 days statisticians across the country were able to access the data, conduct their analysis, build off each other’s work and show up in Florida ready to present their research. This case seems to incorporate all the theme’s we’ve been learning in class all semester – it seems to be the perfect case study illustrating reproducible and collaborative data science. 

This phenomena of analytical rigor and collaboration juxtaposed with the accounts of the educational incompetence of the polling, makes this situation even more frustrating. Whatever governmental group was in charge of creating the sample ballots and educating voters and polling assistants did a terrible job. Polling assistants were telling people that the way to vote for Gore was to double punch (!), which resulted spoiled ballots! 

I was curious what PBC and Florida as a state had done to fix the butterfly ballot and antiquated vote counting system. Turns out right after the election, Congress passed the Help America Vote Act that tried to eliminate punch card machines and train poll workers. PBC spent $14.5M to buy touch screen voting systems which were later replaced because many felt an all-electronic system was susceptible to programming fraud. So PBC spent an additional $5.5M for optical scanning machines which would scan paper ballots and electronically record/count votes. (http://www.palmbeachpost.com/news/ten-years-later-infamous-2000-election-ballot-recount-still-defines-palm-beach-county-many/uscC5niN1BtOOs7d33V8GL/) 

It’s strange to me that we trust electronic systems to host all our private data and personal information but not our votes. To me it seems a bit irrational/hypocritical to not trust the concept of an electronic system. I actually think the optical scanning technology is more likely to cause errors/miscounts than an all-electronic system. 
